Sirs, take your places andbe vigilant:
If any noise or soldieryou perceive
Near to the walls, by someapparent sign
Let us have knowledge atthe court of guard.
Sergeant, you shall.
Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upontheir quiet beds,
Constrain'd to watch indarkness, rain and cold.
Lord Regent, and redoubtedBurgundy,
By whose approach theregions of Artois,
Wallon and Picardy arefriends to us,
This happy night theFrenchmen are secure,
Having all day carousedand banqueted:
Embrace we then thisopportunity
As fitting best toquittance their deceit
Contrived by art andbaleful sorcery.
Coward of France! how muchhe wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his ownarm's fortitude,
To join with witches andthe help of hell!
Traitors have never othercompany.
But what's that Pucellewhom they term so pure?
A maid, they say.
A maid! and be so martial!
Pray God she prove notmasculine ere long,
If underneath the standardof the French
She carry armour as shehath begun.
Well, let them practiseand converse with spirits:
God is our fortress, inwhose conquering name
Let us resolve to scaletheir flinty bulwarks.
Ascend, brave Talbot; wewill follow thee.
Not all together: betterfar, I guess,
That we do make ourentrance several ways;
That, if it chance the oneof us do fail,
The other yet may riseagainst their force.
Agreed: I'll to yondcorner.
And I to this.
And there will Talbotmount, or make his grave.
Now, Salisbury, for thee,and for the right
Of English Henry, shallthis night appear
How much in duty I ambound to both.
Arm! arm! the enemy dothmake assault!
Cry: 'St. George,' 'ATalbot.'
How now, my lords! what,all unready so?
Unready! ay, and glad we'scaped so well.
'Twas time, I trow, towake and leave our beds,
Hearing alarums at ourchamber-doors.
I think this Talbot be afiend of hell.
If not of hell, theheavens, sure, favour him.
Here cometh Charles: Imarvel how he sped.
Tut, holy Joan was hisdefensive guard.
Is this thy cunning, thoudeceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, toflatter us withal,
Make us partakers of alittle gain,
That now our loss might beten times so much?
Wherefore is Charlesimpatient with his friend!
At all times will you havemy power alike?
Sleeping or waking must Istill prevail,
Or will you blame and laythe fault on me?
Improvident soldiers! hadyour watch been good,
This sudden mischief nevercould have fall'n.
Duke of Alencon, this wasyour default,
That, being captain of thewatch to-night,
Did look no better to thatweighty charge.
Had all your quarters beenas safely kept
As that whereof I had thegovernment,
We had not been thusshamefully surprised.
Mine was secure.
And so was mine, my lord.
And, for myself, most partof all this night,
Within her quarter andmine own precinct
I was employ'd in passingto and fro,
About relieving of thesentinels:
Then how or which wayshould they first break in?
Question, my lords, nofurther of the case,
How or which way: 'tissure they found some place
But weakly guarded, wherethe breach was made.
And now there rests noother shift but this;
To gather our soldiers,scatter'd and dispersed,
And lay new platforms toendamage them.
Cry: A Talbot
I'll be so bold to takewhat they have left.
The cry of Talbot servesme for a sword;
For I have loaden me withmany spoils,
Using no other weapon buthis name.
Cry: A Talbot
Here sound retreat, andcease our hot pursuit.
The day begins to break,and night is fled,
Whose pitchy mantleover-veil'd the earth.
Now have I paid my vowto Salisbury's soul;
For every drop of bloodwas drawn from him,
There hath at least fiveFrenchmen died tonight.
And that hereafter agesmay behold
What ruin happen'd inrevenge of him,
Within their chiefesttemple I'll erect
A tomb, wherein his corpseshall be interr'd:
Upon the which, that everyone may read,
Shall be engraved the sackof Orleans,
The treacherous manner ofhis mournful death
And what a terror he hadbeen to France.
Advance his body tothe marketplace,
the middle center of thiscursed town.
But, lords, in all ourbloody massacre,
I muse we met not with theDauphin's grace,
His new-come champion,virtuous Joan of Arc,
Nor any of his falseconfederates.
'Tis thought, Lord Talbot,when the fight began,
Roused on the sudden fromtheir drowsy beds,
They did amongst thetroops of armed men
Leap o'er the walls forrefuge in the field.
Myself, as far as I couldwell discern
For smoke and duskyvapours of the night,
Am sure I scared theDauphin and his trull,
When arm in arm they bothcame swiftly running,
Like to a pair of lovingturtle-doves
That could not liveasunder day or night.
After that things are setin order here,
We'll follow them with allthe power we have.
All hail, my lords! whichof this princely train
Call ye the warlikeTalbot, for his acts
So much applauded throughthe realm of France?
Here is the Talbot: whowould speak with him?
The virtuous lady,Countess of Auvergne,
With modesty admiring thyrenown,
By me entreats, great lord,thou wouldst vouchsafe
To visit her poor castlewhere she lies,
That she may boast shehath beheld the man
Whose glory fills theworld with loud report.
Is it even so? Nay, then,I see our wars
Will turn unto a peacefulcomic sport,
When ladies crave to beencounter'd with.
You may not, my lord,despise her gentle suit.
Ne'er trust me then; forwhen a world of men
Could not prevail with alltheir oratory,
Yet hath a woman'skindness over-ruled:
And therefore tell her Ireturn great thanks,
And in submission willattend on her.
Will not your honours bearme company?
No, truly; it is more thanmanners will:
And I have heard it said,unbidden guests
Are often welcomest whenthey are gone.
Well then, alone, sincethere's no remedy,
I mean to prove thislady's courtesy.
Come hither, captain.
You perceive my mind?
I do, my lord, and meanaccordingly.
Porter, remember what Igave in charge;
And when you have done so,bring the keys to me.
Madam, I will.
The plot is laid: if allthings fall out right,
I shall as famous be bythis exploit
As Scythian Tomyris byCyrus' death.
Great is the rumor of thisdreadful knight,
And his achievements of noless account:
Fain would mine eyes bewitness with mine ears,
To give their censure ofthese rare reports.
Madam,
According as your ladyshipdesired,
By message craved, so isLord Talbot come.
And he is welcome. What!is this the man?
Madam, it is.
Is this the scourge ofFrance?
Is this the Talbot, somuch fear'd abroad
That with his name themothers still their babes?
I see report is fabulousand false:
I thought I should haveseen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for hisgrim aspect,
And large proportion ofhis strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, asilly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak andwrithled shrimp
Should strike such terrorto his enemies.
Madam, I have been bold totrouble you;
But since your ladyship isnot at leisure,
I'll sort some other timeto visit you.
What means he now? Go askhim whither he goes.
Stay, my Lord Talbot; formy lady craves
To know the cause of yourabrupt departure.
Marry, for that she's in awrong belief,
I go to certify herTalbot's here.
If thou be he, then artthou prisoner.
Prisoner! to whom?
To me, blood-thirsty lord;
And for that cause Itrained thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hathbeen thrall to me,
For in my gallery thypicture hangs:
But now the substanceshall endure the like,
And I will chain theselegs and arms of thine,
That hast by tyranny thesemany years
Wasted our country, slainour citizens
And sent our sons andhusbands captivate.
Ha, ha, ha!
Laughest thou, wretch? thymirth shall turn to moan.
I laugh to see yourladyship so fond
To think that you haveaught but Talbot's shadow
Whereon to practise yourseverity.
Why, art not thou the man?
I am indeed.
Then have I substance too.
No, no, I am but shadow ofmyself:
You are deceived, mysubstance is not here;
For what you see is butthe smallest part
And least proportion ofhumanity:
I tell you, madam, werethe whole frame here,
It is of such a spaciouslofty pitch,
Your roof were notsufficient to contain't.
This is a riddlingmerchant for the nonce;
He will be here, and yethe is not here:
How can thesecontrarieties agree?
That will I show youpresently.
How say you, madam? areyou now persuaded
That Talbot is but shadowof himself?
These are his substance,sinews, arms and strength,
With which he yoketh yourrebellious necks,
Razeth your cities andsubverts your towns
And in a moment makes themdesolate.
Victorious Talbot! pardonmy abuse:
I find thou art no lessthan fame hath bruited
And more than may begather'd by thy shape.
Let my presumption notprovoke thy wrath;
For I am sorry that withreverence
I did not entertain theeas thou art.
Be not dismay'd, fairlady; nor misconstrue
The mind of Talbot, as youdid mistake
The outward composition ofhis body.
What you have done hathnot offended me;
Nor other satisfaction doI crave,
But only, with yourpatience, that we may
Taste of your wine and seewhat cates you have;
For soldiers' stomachsalways serve them well.
With all my heart, andthink me honoured
To feast so great awarrior in my house.
Great lords and gentlemen,what means this silence?
Dare no man answer in acase of truth?
Within the Temple-hall wewere too loud;
The garden here is moreconvenient.
Then say at once if Imaintain'd the truth;
Or else was wranglingSomerset in the error?
Faith, I have been atruant in the law,
And never yet could framemy will to it;
And therefore frame thelaw unto my will.
Judge you, my Lord ofWarwick, then, between us.
Between two hawks, whichflies the higher pitch;
Between two dogs, whichhath the deeper mouth;
Between two blades, whichbears the better temper:
Between two horses, whichdoth bear him best;
Between two girls, whichhath the merriest eye;
I have perhaps some shallowspirit of judgement;
But in these nice sharpquillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiserthan a daw.
Tut, tut, here is amannerly forbearance:
The truth appears so nakedon my side
That any purblind eye mayfind it out.
And on my side it is sowell apparell'd,
So clear, so shining andso evident
That it will glimmerthrough a blind man's eye.
Since you are tongue-tiedand so loath to speak,
In dumb significantsproclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is atrue-born gentleman
And stands upon the honourof his birth,
If he suppose that I havepleaded truth,
From off this brier plucka white rose with me.
Let him that is no cowardnor no flatterer,
But dare maintain theparty of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from offthis thorn with me.
I love no colours, andwithout all colour
Of base insinuatingflattery
I pluck this white rosewith Plantagenet.
I pluck this red rose withyoung Somerset
And say withal I think heheld the right.
Stay, lords and gentlemen,and pluck no more,
Till you conclude that heupon whose side
The fewest roses arecropp'd from the tree
Shall yield the other inthe right opinion.
Good Master Vernon, it iswell objected:
If I have fewest, Isubscribe in silence.
And I.
Then for the truth andplainness of the case.
I pluck this pale andmaiden blossom here,
Giving my verdict on thewhite rose side.
Prick not your finger asyou pluck it off,
Lest bleeding you do paintthe white rose red
And fall on my side so,against your will.
If I my lord, for myopinion bleed,
Opinion shall be surgeonto my hurt
And keep me on the sidewhere now I am.
Well, well, come on: whoelse?
Unless my study and mybooks be false,
The argument you held waswrong in you:
In sign whereof I pluck awhite rose too.
Now, Somerset, where isyour argument?
Here in my scabbard,meditating that
Shall dye your white rosein a bloody red.
Meantime your cheeks docounterfeit our roses;
For pale they look withfear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.
No, Plantagenet,
'Tis not for fear butanger that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame tocounterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue willnot confess thy error.
Hath not thy rose acanker, Somerset?
Hath not thy rose a thorn,Plantagenet?
Ay, sharp and piercing, tomaintain his truth;
Whiles thy consumingcanker eats his falsehood.
Well, I'll find friends towear my bleeding roses,
That shall maintain what Ihave said is true,
Where false Plantagenetdare not be seen.
Now, by this maidenblossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thyfashion, peevish boy.
Turn not thy scorns thisway, Plantagenet.
Proud Pole, I will, andscorn both him and thee.
I'll turn my part thereofinto thy throat.
Away, away, good Williamde la Pole!
We grace the yeoman byconversing with him.
Now, by God's will, thouwrong'st him, Somerset;
His grandfather was LionelDuke of Clarence,
Third son to the thirdEdward King of England:
Spring crestless yeomenfrom so deep a root?
He bears him on theplace's privilege,
Or durst not, for hiscraven heart, say thus.
By him that made me, I'llmaintain my words
On any plot of ground inChristendom.
Was not thy father,Richard Earl of Cambridge,
For treason 'headed inour late king's days?
And, by his treason,stand'st not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt fromancient gentry?
His trespass yet livesguilty in thy blood;
And, till thou be restored,thou art a yeoman.
My father was attached,not attainted,
Condemn'd to die fortreason, but no traitor;
And that I'll prove onbetter men than Somerset,
Were growing time onceripen'd to my will.
For your partaker Pole andyou yourself,
I'll note you in my bookof memory,
To scourge you for thisapprehension:
Look to it well and sayyou are well warn'd.
Ah, thou shalt find usready for thee still;
And know us by thesecolours for thy foes,
For these my friends inspite of thee shall wear.
And, by my soul, this paleand angry rose,
As cognizance of myblood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever and myfaction wear,
Until it wither with me tomy grave
Or flourish to the heightof my degree.
Go forward and be chokedwith thy ambition!
And so farewell until Imeet thee next.
Have with thee, Pole.Farewell, ambitious Richard.
How I am braved and mustperforce endure it!
This blot that they objectagainst your house
Shall be wiped out in thenext parliament
Call'd for the truce ofWinchester and Gloucester;
And if thou be not thencreated York,
I will not live to beaccounted Warwick.
Meantime, in signal of mylove to thee,
Against proud Somerset andWilliam Pole,
Will I upon thy party wearthis rose:
And here I prophesy: thisbrawl to-day,
Grown to this faction inthe Temple-garden,
Shall send between the redrose and the white
A thousand souls to deathand deadly night.
Good Master Vernon, I ambound to you,
That you on my behalfwould pluck a flower.
In your behalf still willI wear the same.
And so will I.
Thanks, gentle sir.
Come, let us four todinner: I dare say
This quarrel will drinkblood another day.
Kind keepers of my weakdecaying age,
Let dying Mortimer hererest himself.
Even like a man new haledfrom the rack,
So fare my limbs with longimprisonment.
And these grey locks, thepursuivants of death,
Nestor-like aged in an ageof care,
Argue the end of EdmundMortimer.
But tell me, keeper, willmy nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, mylord, will come:
We sent unto the Temple,unto his chamber;
And answer was return'dthat he will come.
Enough: my soul shall thenbe satisfied.
Poor gentleman! his wrongdoth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth firstbegan to reign,
Before whose glory I wasgreat in arms,
This loathsomesequestration have I had:
Even so long hasRichard been obscured,
Deprived of honour andinheritance.
But now the arbitrator ofdespairs,
Just death, kind umpire ofmen's miseries,
With sweet enlargementdoth dismiss me hence:
I would his troubleslikewise were expired,
That so he might recoverwhat was lost.
My lord, your lovingnephew now is come.
Richard Plantagenet, myfriend, is he come?
Ay, noble uncle, thusignobly used,
Your nephew, late despisedRichard, comes.
Direct mine arms I mayembrace his neck,
And now declare, sweet stemof York's great stock,
Why didst thou say, oflate thou wert despised?
First, lean thine agedback against mine arm;
And, in that ease, I'lltell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upona case,
Some words there grew'twixt Somerset and me;
Among which terms he usedhis lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with myfather's death:
Therefore, good uncle, formy father's sake,
In honour of a truePlantagenet
And for alliance sake,declare the cause
My father, Earl ofCambridge, lost his head.
That cause, fair nephew,that imprison'd me
And hath detain'd me allmy flowering youth
Within a loathsomedungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed instrument ofhis decease.
Discover more at largewhat cause that was,
Henry the Fourth,grandfather to this king,
Deposed his nephewRichard,
The first-begotten and thelawful heir,
Of Edward king, the thirdof that descent:
In Henry's reign thePercies of the north,
Finding his usurpationmost unjust,
Endeavor'd my advancementto the throne:
The reason moved thesewarlike lords to this
Was, for that--young KingRichard thus removed,
Leaving no heir begottenof his body--
I was the next by birthand parentage;
For by my mother I derivedam
From Lionel Duke ofClarence, the third son
To King Edward the Third;whereas he
From John of Gaunt dothbring his pedigree,
Being but fourth of thatheroic line.
But mark: as in thatgreat haughty attempt
They laboured to plantthe rightful heir,
I lost my liberty and theytheir lives.
Long after this, whenHenry the Fifth,
Succeeding his fatherBolingbroke, did reign,
Thy father, the Earl ofCambridge then, derived
From famous EdmundLangley, Duke of York,
Marrying my sister thatthy mother was,
Again in pity of my harddistress
Levied an army, weening toredeem
And have install'd me inthe diadem:
But, as the rest, so fellthat noble earl
And was beheaded. Thus theMortimers,
In whom the title rested,were suppress'd.
Of which, my lord, yourhonour is the last.
True; and thou seest thatI no issue have
Thou art my heir; the restI wish thee gather:
My dear, be wary in thystudious care.
Thy grave admonishmentsprevail with me:
But yet, methinks, myfather's execution
Was nothing less thanbloody tyranny.
With silence, nephew, bethou politic:
Strong-fixed is the houseof Lancaster,
And like a mountain, notto be removed.
But now thy uncle isremoving hence:
As princes do their courts,when they are cloy'd
With long continuance in asettled place.
O, uncle, would some partof my young years
Might but redeem thepassage of your age!
Thou then dost wrong me,as that slaughterer doth
Which giveth many woundswhen one will kill.
Mourn not, except thousorrow for my good;
Only give order for myfuneral:
And so farewell, and fairbe all thy hopes
And prosperous be thy lifein peace and war!
And peace, no war, befallthy parting soul!
Well, I will lock hiscounsel in my breast;
And what I do imagine letthat rest.
Keepers, convey him hence,and I myself
Will see his burial betterthan his life.
Here dies the dusky torchof Mortimer,
Choked with ambition ofthe meaner sort:
And for those wrongs,those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hathoffer'd to my house:
I doubt not but withhonour to redress;
And therefore haste I tothe parliament,
Either to be restored tomy blood,
Or make my ill theadvantage of my good.